Part 1—Getting Familiar with Time Series

Chapter 1, Introducing Time Series, is all about introducing you to the world of time series. We lay down a definition of time series and talk about how it is related to a Data Generating Process (DGP). We will also talk about the limits of forecasting and talk about what we cannot forecast, and then we finish off the chapter by laying down some terminology that will help you understand the rest of the book.

Chapter 2, Acquiring and Processing Time Series Data, covers how you can process time series data. You will understand how different forms of time series data can be represented in a tabular form. You will learn different date-time-related functionalities in pandas and learn how to fill in missing data using techniques suited for time series. Finally, using a real-world dataset, you will go through a step-by-step journey in processing time series data using pandas.

Chapter 3, Analyzing and Visualizing Time Series Data, furthers your introduction to time series by learning how to visualize and analyze time series. You will learn different visualizations that are commonly used for time series data and then learn how to go one level deeper by decomposing time series into its components. To wrap it up, you will also look at ways to identify and treat outliers in time series data.

Chapter 4, Setting a Strong Baseline Forecast, gets right to the topic of time series forecasting as we use tried and tested methods from econometrics, such as ARIMA and exponential smoothing, to generate strong baselines. These efficient forecasting methods will provide strong baselines so that we can go beyond these classical techniques and learn modern techniques, such as machine learning. You will also get an introduction to another key topic—assessing forecastability using techniques such as spectral entropy and coefficient of variation.

Part 2—Machine Learning for Time Series

Chapter 5, Time Series Forecasting as Regression, starts our journey into using machine learning for forecasting. A short introduction to machine learning lays down the foundations of what is to come in the next chapters. You will also understand, conceptually, how we can cast a time series problem as a regression problem so that we can use machine learning for it. To close off the chapter, we tease you with the possibility of global forecasting models.

Chapter 6, Feature Engineering for Time Series Forecasting, shifts gear into a more practical lesson. Using a real-world dataset, you will learn about different feature engineering techniques, such as lag features, rolling features, and Fourier terms, which help us formulate a time series problem as a regression problem.

Chapter 7, Target Transformations for Time Series Forecasting, continues the practice of exploring different target transformations to accommodate non-stationarity in time series. You will learn techniques such as the augmented Dickey–Fuller test and Mann–Kendall test to identify and treat non-stationarity.

Chapter 8, Forecasting Time Series with Machine Learning Models, continues from where the last chapter left off to start training machine learning models on the dataset we have been working on. Using the standard code framework present in the book, you will train models such as linear regression, random forest, and gradient-boosted decision trees on our dataset.

Chapter 9, Ensembling and Stacking, takes a step back and explores how we can use multiple forecasts and combine them to create a better forecast. You will explore popular techniques such as best fit, different versions of the hill-climbing algorithm, simulated annealing, and stacking to combine the different forecasts we have generated to get a better one.

Chapter 10, Global Forecasting Models, concludes your guided journey into machine learning-enabled forecasting to an exciting and new paradigm—global forecasting models. You will learn how to use global forecasting models and industry-proven techniques to improve their performance, which finally lets you develop scalable and efficient machine learning forecasting systems for thousands of time series.

Part 3—Deep Learning for Time Series

Chapter 11, Introduction to Deep Learning, we switch tracks and start with a specific type of machine learning—deep learning. In this chapter, we lay the foundations of deep learning by looking at different topics such as representation learning, linear transformations, activation functions, and gradient descent.

Chapter 12, Building Blocks of Deep Learning for Time Series, continues the journey into deep learning by making it specific to time series. Keeping in mind the compositionality of deep learning systems, you will learn about different building blocks with which you can construct a deep learning architecture. The chapter starts off by establishing the encoder-decoder architecture and then talks about different blocks such as feed forward networks, recurrent neural networks, and convolutional neural networks.

Chapter 13, Common Modeling Patterns for Time Series, strengthens the encoder-decoder architecture that you saw in the previous chapter by showing you a few concrete and common patterns in which you can arrange building blocks to generate forecasts. This is a hands-on chapter where you will be creating forecasts using deep learning-based tabular regression and different sequence-to-sequence models.

Chapter 14, Attention and Transformers for Time Series, covers the contemporary topic of using attention to improve deep learning models. The chapter starts off by talking about a generalized attention model with which you will learn different types of attention schemes, such as scaled dot product and additive. You will also tweak the sequence-to-sequence models from the previous chapter to include attention and then train those models to generate a forecast. The chapter then talks about transformer models, which is a deep learning architecture that relies solely on attention, and then you will use that to generate forecasts as well.

Chapter 15, Strategies for Global Deep Learning Forecasting Models, tackles yet another important aspect of deep learning-based forecasting. Although the book talked about global forecasting models earlier, there are some differences in how it is implemented for deep learning models. In this chapter, you will learn how to implement global deep learning models and techniques on how to make those models better. You will also see them working in the hands-on section, where we will be generating forecasts using the real-world dataset we have been working with.

Chapter 16, Specialized Deep Learning Architectures for Forecasting, concludes your journey into deep learning-based time series forecasting by talking about a few popular, specialized deep learning architectures for time series forecasting. Using the concepts and building blocks you have learned through the previous chapters, this chapter takes you to the cutting edge of research and exposes the leading state-of-the-art models in time series forecasting such as N-BEATS, N-HiTS, Informer, Autoformer, and Temporal Fusion Transformer. In addition to understanding them, you will also learn how to use these models to generate forecasts using a real-world dataset.

Chapter 17, Probabilistic Forecasting and More, take you into the realm of probabilistic forecasting with techniques like Conformal Prediction, Monte Carlo Dropout, Quantile Functions, and Probability Density Functions and enable you to practically implement these using popular open-source frameworks. The chapter also takes the road less travelled in time series forecasting and talk about Intermittent Forecasting, Interpretability, Cold Start Forecasting, and Hierarchical forecasting at a high level to serve as a starting point in your journey into those.

Part 4—Mechanics of Forecasting

Chapter 18, Multi-Step Forecasting, tackles the rarely talked-about but highly relevant topic of multi-step forecasting. You will learn about different strategies for generating forecasts for more than one time step into the future, such as Recursive, Direct, DirRec, RecJoint, and Rectify. The book also talks about the merits and demerits of each of them and helps you choose the right strategy for your problem.

Chapter 19, Evaluating Forecast Errors—A Survey of Forecast Metrics, traverses yet another topic that is rarely talked about and rife with controversy, with many opinions from different quarters. You will learn about different ways to measure the goodness of a forecast and through experiments, which you can run, expose the strengths and weaknesses of different metrics. The chapter concludes by laying down some guidelines that can help you choose the correct metric for your problem.

Chapter 20, Evaluating Forecasts—Validation Strategies, concludes the evaluation of forecasts and the book by talking about different validation strategies we can use for time series. You will learn different validation strategies such as hold-out, cross-validation, and their variations. The chapter also touches upon aspects to keep in mind while designing validation strategies for global settings as well. At the conclusion of the chapter, you will come across a few guidelines for choosing your validation strategies and answers to questions such as can we use cross-validation for time series?


Vector Autoregression (VAR): Forecasting multiple time series simultaneously.
Data Windowing: Creating windows of data for deep learning models (single-step, multi-step, and multi-output baselines).
Linear Deep Learning Models: Implementing linear models for single-step, multi-step, and multi-output forecasting.
Deep Neural Networks (DNN): Building standard DNNs for time series prediction.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM): Utilizing Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to remember past data sequences using input, output, and forget gates.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN): Filtering time series data using convolutional layers.
Autoregressive LSTM (ARLSTM): Combining autoregressive properties with the LSTM architecture to use predictions to make further predictions.
Prophet: Automating time series forecasting at scale, including cross-validation, hyperparameter tuning, and utilizing Prophet's advanced functionality.


Chapter 3, Creating Node Representations with DeepWalk, focuses on DeepWalk, a pioneer in applying machine learning to graph data. The main objective of the DeepWalk architecture is to generate node representations that other models can utilize for downstream tasks such as node classification. The chapter covers two key components of DeepWalk – Word2Vec and random walks – with a particular emphasis on the Word2Vec skip-gram model.

Chapter 4, Improving Embeddings with Biased Random Walks in Node2Vec, focuses on the Node2Vec architecture, which is based on the DeepWalk architecture covered in the previous chapter. The chapter covers the modifications made to the random walk generation in Node2Vec and how to select the best parameters for a specific graph. The implementation of Node2Vec is compared to DeepWalk on Zachary’s Karate Club to highlight the differences between the two architectures. The chapter concludes with a practical application of Node2Vec, building a movie recommendation system.

Chapter 5, Including Node Features with Vanilla Neural Networks, explores the integration of additional information, such as node and edge features, into the graph embeddings to produce more accurate results. The chapter starts with a comparison of vanilla neural networks’ performance on node features only, treated as tabular datasets. Then, we will experiment with adding topological information to the neural networks, leading to the creation of a simple vanilla GNN architecture.

Chapter 6, Introducing Graph Convolutional Networks, focuses on the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) architecture and its importance as a blueprint for GNNs. It covers the limitations of previous vanilla GNN layers and explains the motivation behind GCNs. The chapter details how the GCN layer works, its performance improvements over the vanilla GNN layer, and its implementation on the Cora and Facebook Page-Page datasets using PyTorch Geometric. The chapter also touches upon the task of node regression and the benefits of transforming tabular data into a graph.

Chapter 7, Graph Attention Networks, focuses on Graph Attention Networks (GATs), which are an improvement over GCNs. The chapter explains how GATs work by using the concept of self-attention and provides a step-by-step understanding of the graph attention layer. The chapter also implements a graph attention layer from scratch using NumPy. The final section of the chapter discusses the use of a GAT on two node classification datasets, Cora and CiteSeer, and compares the accuracy with that of a GCN.

Chapter 8, Scaling up Graph Neural Networks with GraphSAGE, focuses on the GraphSAGE architecture and its ability to handle large graphs effectively. The chapter covers the two main ideas behind GraphSAGE, including its neighbor sampling technique and aggregation operators. You will learn about the variants proposed by tech companies such as Uber Eats and Pinterest, as well as the benefits of GraphSAGE’s inductive approach. The chapter concludes by implementing GraphSAGE for node classification and multi-label classification tasks.

Chapter 9, Defining Expressiveness for Graph Classification, explores the concept of expressiveness in GNNs and how it can be used to design better models. It introduces the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test, which provides the framework for understanding expressiveness in GNNs. The chapter uses the WL test to compare different GNN layers and determine the most expressive one. Based on this result, a more powerful GNN is designed and implemented using PyTorch Geometric. The chapter concludes with a comparison of different methods for graph classification on the PROTEINS dataset.

Chapter 10, Predicting Links with Graph Neural Networks, focuses on link prediction in graphs. It covers traditional techniques, such as matrix factorization and GNN-based methods. The chapter explains the concept of link prediction and its importance in social networks and recommender systems. You will learn about the limitations of traditional techniques and the benefits of using GNN-based methods. We will explore three GNN-based techniques from two different families, including node embeddings and subgraph representation. Finally, you will implement various link prediction techniques in PyTorch Geometric and choose the best method for a given problem.

Chapter 11, Generating Graphs Using Graph Neural Networks, explores the field of graph generation, which involves finding methods to create new graphs. The chapter first introduces you to traditional techniques such as Erdős–Rényi and small-world models. Then you will focus on three families of solutions for GNN-based graph generation: VAE-based, autoregressive, and GAN-based models. The chapter concludes with an implementation of a GAN-based framework with Reinforcement Learning (RL) to generate new chemical compounds using the DeepChem library with TensorFlow.

Chapter 12, Learning from Heterogeneous Graphs, focuses on heterogeneous GNNs. Heterogeneous graphs contain different types of nodes and edges, in contrast to homogeneous graphs, which only involve one type of node and one type of edge. The chapter begins by reviewing the Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN) framework for homogeneous GNNs, then expands the framework to heterogeneous networks. Finally, we introduce a technique for creating a heterogeneous dataset, transforming homogeneous architectures into heterogeneous ones, and discussing an architecture specifically designed for processing heterogeneous networks.

Chapter 13, Temporal Graph Neural Networks, focuses on Temporal GNNs, or Spatio-Temporal GNNs, which are a type of GNN that can handle graphs with changing edges and features over time. The chapter first explains the concept of dynamic graphs and the applications of temporal GNNs, focusing on time series forecasting. The chapter then moves on to the application of temporal GNNs to web traffic forecasting to improve results using temporal information. Finally, the chapter describes another temporal GNN architecture specifically designed for dynamic graphs and applies it to the task of epidemic forecasting.

Chapter 14, Explaining Graph Neural Networks, covers various techniques to better understand the predictions and behavior of a GNN model. The chapter highlights two popular explanation methods: GNNExplainer and integrated gradients. Then, you will see the application of these techniques on a graph classification task using the MUTAG dataset and a node classification task using the Twitch social network.

Chapter 15, Forecasting Traffic Using A3T-GCN, focuses on the application of Temporal Graph Neural Networks in the field of traffic forecasting. It highlights the importance of accurate traffic forecasts in smart cities and the challenges of traffic forecasting due to complex spatial and temporal dependencies. The chapter covers the steps involved in processing a new dataset to create a temporal graph and the implementation of a new type of temporal GNN to predict future traffic speed. Finally, the results are compared to a baseline solution to verify the relevance of the architecture.

Chapter 16, Detecting Anomalies Using Heterogeneous GNNs, focuses on the application of GNNs in anomaly detection. GNNs, with their ability to capture complex relationships, make them well-suited for detecting anomalies and can handle large amounts of data efficiently. In this chapter, you will learn how to implement a GNN for intrusion detection in computer networks using the CIDDS-001 dataset. The chapter covers processing the dataset, building relevant features, implementing a heterogenous GNN, and evaluating the results to determine its effectiveness in detecting anomalies in network traffic.

Chapter 17, Recommending Books Using LightGCN, focuses on the application of GNNs in recommender systems. The goal of recommender systems is to provide personalized recommendations to users based on their interests and past interactions. GNNs are well-suited for this task as they can effectively incorporate complex relationships between users and items. In this chapter, the LightGCN architecture is introduced as a GNN specifically designed for recommender systems. Using the Book-Crossing dataset, the chapter demonstrates how to build a book recommender system with collaborative filtering using the LightGCN architecture.

Chapter 18, Unlocking the Potential of Graph Neural Networks for Real-Word Applications, summarizes what we have learned throughout the book, and looks ahead to the future of GNNs.